# Generic Types, Traits, and Lifetimes

Every programming language has tools for effectively handling the duplication of concepts.
In Rust, one such tool is _generics_. Generics are abstract stand-ins for concrete types or other properties. When we're writing code, we can express the behavior of generics or how they relate to other generics without knowing what will be in their place when compiling and running the code.

Similar to the way a function takes parameters with unknown values to run the same code on multiple concrete values, functions can take parameters
of some generic type instead of a concrete type, like `i32` or `String`.
In fact, we've already used generics in Chapter 6 with `Option<T>`,
Chapter 8 with `Vec<T>` and `HashMap<K, V>`, and Chapter 9 with `Result<T, E>`.
In this chapter, you'll explore how to define your own types,
functions, and methods with generics!

First, we'll review how to extract a function to reduce code duplication.
Next, we'll use the same technique to make a generic function from two functions that differ only in the types of their parameters.
We'll also explain how to use generics types in struct and enum definitions.

Then you'll learn how to use _traits_ to define
behavior in a generic way.
You can combine traits with generic types to constrain a generic type to only those types that have a particular behavior,
as opposed to just any type.

Finally, we'll discuss _lifetimes_,
a variety of generics that give the compiler information about
fow references relate to each other.
Lifetimes allow us to borrow values in many situations while still enabling the compiler to check that the references are valid.

## Removing Duplication by Extracting a Function

Befor diving into generics syntax,
let's first look at how to remove duplication that doesn't
involve generic types by extracting a function.
Then we'll apply this technique to extract a generic function!
In the same way that you recognize duplicated code to extract into a function,
you'll start to recognize duplicated code that can use generics.

Consider a short program that finds the largest number in a list,
as shown in Lisitng 10-1.

Filename: src/main.rs

```rs
fn main() {
    let number_list = vec![34, 50, 25, 100, 65];

    let mut largest = number_list[0];

    for number in number_list {
        if number > largest {
            largest = number;
        }
    }

    println!("The largest number is {}", largest)
}
```

Listing 10-1: Code to find the largest number in a list of numbers

This code stores a list of integers in the variable `number_list` and places the first number in the list in a variable named `largest`.
Then it iterates through all the numbers in the list,
and it the current number is greater than the number stored in `largest`,
it replaces the number in that variable.
However, If the current number is less than or equal to the largest number seen so far,
the variable doesn't change,
and the code moves on to the next number in the list. After considerting all the numbers in the list, `largest` should hold the largest number, which in this case is 100.

To find the largest number in two different lists of numbers,
we can duplicate the code in Listing 10-1 and use the same logic
at two differnt places in the program,
as shown in Listing 10-2.

Filename: src/main.rs

```rs
fn main() {
    let number_list = vec![34, 50, 25, 100, 65];

    let mut largest = number_list[0];

    for number in number_list {
        if number > largest {
            largest = number;
        }
    }

    println!("The largest number is {}", largest)

    let number_list = vec![102,34,6000, 89, 54, 2, 43, 8];

    let mut largest = number_list[0];

    for number in number_list {
        if number > largest {
            largest = number;
        }
    }

    println!("The largest number is {}", largest);
}
```

Listing 10-2: Code to find the largest number in _two_ lists numbers

Although this code works,
duplicating code is tedious and error prone.
We also have to update the code in multiple places when we want to change it.
