# Functions

Functions are pervasive in Rust code.
You've already seen one of the most important
functions in the language:
the `main` function,
which is the entry point of many programs.
You've also seen the `fn` keyword,
which allows you to declare new functions.

Rust code uses _snake case_ as the conventional style for funciton
and variable names.
In snake case,
all letters alre lowercase and underscores separate words.
Here's a program that contains an example function definition:

Filename: src/main.rs

```rs
fn main() {
    println!("Hello, world!");

    another_function();
}

fn another_function() {
    println!("Another function.");
}
```

Function definitions in Rust start with `fn`
and have a set of parentheses after the function name.
The curly brackets tell the compiler where the function body begins and ends.

We can call any function we've defined by entering its name
followed by a set of parentheses.
Because `another_function` is defined in the program,
it can be called from inside the `main` function.
Note that we defined `another_function` _after_ the `main` function in the source code;
we could have defined it before as well.
Rust doesn't care where you define your functions,
only that ther're defined somewhere.

Let's start a new binary project named _functions_ to explore functions further.
Place the `another_function` example in _src/main.rs_ and run it.
You should see the following output:

```
$ cargo run
   Compiling functions v0.1.0 (file:///projects/functions)
    Finished dev [unoptimized + debuginfo] target(s) in 0.28s
     Running `target/debug/functions`
Hello, world!
Another function.
```

The lines execute in the order in which they appear in the `main` function.
First, the "Hello, world!" message prints,
and then `another_function` is called and its message is printed.

## Function Parameters

Functions can also be defined to have _parameters_,
which are special variables that are part of a function's signature.
When a function has parameters,
you can provide it with
concrete values for those parameters.
Technically, the concrete values are called _arguments_,
but in casual conversation,
people tend to use the _words_ parameter* and \_argument* interchangeably for either the variables in a function's definition
or the concrete values passwed in when you call a function.

The following rewritten version of `another_function`
shows what parameters look like in Rust:

Filename: src/main.rs

```rs
fn main() {
    another_function(5);
}

fn another_function(x: i32) {
    println!("The value of x is: {}", x);
}
```

Try running this program;
you should get the following output:

```
$ cargo run
   Compiling functions v0.1.0 (file:///projects/functions)
    Finished dev [unoptimized + debuginfo] target(s) in 1.21s
     Running `target/debug/functions`
The value of x is: 5
```

The declaration of `another_function` has one parameter named `x`.
The type of `x` is specified as `i32`.
When `5` is passed to `another_function`,
the `println!` macro puts `5` where the pair of curly brackets were in the format string.

In function signatures,
you _must_ declare the type of each parameter.
This is a deliberate decision in Rust's design:
requiring type annotations in function definitions means the compiler almost never needs you to use them elsewhere in the code to figure out what you mean.

When you want a funciton to have multiple parameters,
separate the parameter declarations with commas,
like this:

Filename: src/main.rs

```rs
fn main() {
    another_function(5, 6);
}

fn another_function(x: i32, y: i32) {
    println!("The value of x is: {}", x);
    println!("The value of y is: {}", y);
}
```

This example creates a function with
two parameters,
both of which are `i32` types.
The function then prints the values in both of its parameters.
Note that function parameters don't all need to be the same type,
they just happen to be in this example.

Let's try running this code.
Replace the program currently in you _functions_ project's _src/main.rs_ file
with the preceding example and run it using `cargo run`:

```
$ cargo run
   Compiling functions v0.1.0 (file:///projects/functions)
    Finished dev [unoptimized + debuginfo] target(s) in 0.31s
     Running `target/debug/functions`
The value of x is: 5
The value of y is: 6
```

Because we called the function with `5` as the value of `x` and `6` is passed as the value for `y`,
the two strings are printed with these values.

## Function Bodies Contain Statements and Expressions

Function bodies are made up of a series of statements
optionally ending in an expression.
So far,
we've only covered functions without an ending expression,
but you have seen an expression as part of a statement.
Because Rust is an expression-based language,
this is an important distinction to understand.
Other languages don't have the same distictions,
so let's look at what statements and expressions are and how their differences affect the bodies of functions.

We've actually already used statements and expressions.
_Statements_ are instructions that perform some
action and do not return a value.
_Expressions_ evaluate to a resulting value.
Let's look at some examples.

Creating a variable and assigning a value to it with the `let` keyword is a statement.
In Listing 3-1,
`let y = 6;` is a statement.

Filename: src/main.rs

```rs
fn main() {
    let y = 6;
}
```

Listing 3-1: A `main` function declaration containing one statement

Function
