# Control Flow

Deciding whether or not to run some code depending on if a condition is true and deciding to run some code repeatedly while a condition is true are basic building blocks in most programming languages.
The most common constructs
that let you control the flow of execution of Rust code are `if` expressions and loops.

## `if` Expressions

An `if` expression allows you to branch you code depending on conditions.
You provide a condition and then state,
"If this condition is met,
run this block of code.
If the condition is not met,
do not run this block of code."

Create a new project called `branches` in you _projects_ directory
to explore the `if` expression.
In the _src/main.rs_ file,
input the following:

Filename: src/main.rs

```rs
fn main() {
    let number = 3;

    if number < 5 {
        println!("condition was true");
    } else {
        println!("condition was false");
    }
}
```

All `if` expressions start with the keyword `if`,
which is followed by a condition.
In this case,
the condition checks whether or not the variable `number` has a value
less that 5.
The block of code we want to execute
if the condition is true is placed immediately after the condition inside curly brackets.
Blocks of code associated with the conditions
is `if` expressions are sometimes called _arms_,
just like the arms in `match` expressions
that we discussed in the "Comparing the Guess to the Secret Number"
section of Chapter 2.

Optionally,
we can also include an `else` expression,
which we chose to do here,
to give the program an alternative block of code to execute
should the condition evaluate to false.
If you don't provide an `else` expression
and the condition is false,
the program will just skip the `if` block and move on to the next bit of code.

Try running this code;
you should see the following output:

```
$ cargo run
   Compiling branches v0.1.0 (file:///projects/branches)
    Finished dev [unoptimized + debuginfo] target(s) in 0.31s
     Running `target/debug/branches`
condition was true
```

Let's try changing the value of `number` to a value that makes the condition `false` to see what happens:

```rs
    let number = 7;
```

Run the program again, and look at the output:

```
$ cargo run
   Compiling branches v0.1.0 (file:///projects/branches)
    Finished dev [unoptimized + debuginfo] target(s) in 0.31s
     Running `target/debug/branches`
condition was false
```

It's also worth noting that the condition in this code
_must_ be a `bool`.
If the condition ins't a `bool`,
we'll get an error.
For example,
try running the following code:

Filename: src/main.rs

```rs
fn main() {
    let number = 3;

    if number {
        println!("number was three");
    }
}
```

The `if` condition evaluates to a value of `3` this time,
and Rust throws an error:

```
$ cargo run
   Compiling branches v0.1.0 (file:///projects/branches)
error[E0308]: mismatched types
 --> src/main.rs:4:8
  |
4 |     if number {
  |        ^^^^^^ expected `bool`, found integer

error: aborting due to previous error

For more information about this error, try `rustc --explain E0308`.
error: could not compile `branches`

To learn more, run the command again with --verbose.
```

The error indicates that Rust expected a `bool` but got an integer.
Unlike languages such as Ruby and JavaScript,
Rust will not automatically try to convert non-Boolean types
to a Boolean.
You must be explicit and always provide `if` with a Boolean
as its condition.
If we want the `if` code block
to run only when a number is not equal to `0`,
for example,
we can change the `if` expression to the following:

Filename: src/main.rs

```rs
fn main() {
    let number = 3;

    if number != 0 {
        println!("number was something other than zero");
    }
}
```

Rurnning this code will print `number was something other than zero`.

## Handling Multiple Conditions with `else fi`

You can have multiple conditions by combining `if` and `else` in an
`else if` expression.
For example:

Filename: src/main.rs

```rs
fn main() {
    let number = 6;

    if number % 4 == 0 {
        println!("number is divisible by 4");
    } else if number % 3 == 0 {
        println!("number is divisible by 3");
    } else if number % 2 == 0 {
        println!("number is divisible by 2";)
    } else  {
        println!("number is not divisible by 4, 3, or 2");
    }
}
```

This program has four possible paths it can take.
After running it,
you should see the following output:

```
$ cargo run
   Compiling branches v0.1.0 (file:///projects/branches)
    Finished dev [unoptimized + debuginfo] target(s) in 0.31s
     Running `target/debug/branches`
number is divisible by 3
```

When this program executes,
it checks each `if` expression in turn and executes the
first body for which the condition holds true.
Note that even though 6 is divisible by 2,
we don't see the outbut `number is divisible by 2`,
nor do we see the `number is not divisible by 4, 3, or 2` text
from the else block.
That's because Rust only executes the block for the first true condition,
and once it finds one,
it doesn't even check the rest.

## Using `if` in a `let` Statement

Because `if` is an expression,
we can use it on the right side of `let` statement,
as in Listing 3-2.

Filename: src/main.rs

```rs
fn main() {
    let condition = true;
    let number = if condition { 5 } else { 6 };

    println!("The value of number is: {}", number);
}
```

Listing 3-2: Assigning the result of an `if` expression to a variable

The `number` variable will be bound to a value on the outcome of the `if`
expression.
Run this code to see what happens:

```
$ cargo run
   Compiling branches v0.1.0 (file:///projects/branches)
    Finished dev [unoptimized + debuginfo] target(s) in 0.30s
     Running `target/debug/branches`
The value of number is: 5
```

Remember that blocks of code evaluate to the last expression in them,
and numbers by themselves are also expressions.
In this case,
the value of the whole `if` expression depends on which block of code executes.
This means the values that have the potential to be results from each arm of the `if` must be the same type;
in Listing 3-2,
the results of both the `if` arm and the `else` arm were `i32` integers.
If the types are mismatched,
as in the following example,
we'll get an error:

Filename: src/main.rs

```rs
fn main() {
    let condition = true;

    let number = if condition { 5 } else { "six" };

    println!("The value of number is: {}", number);
}
```

When we try to compile this code,
we'll get an error.
The `if` and `else` arms have value types that are incompatible,
and Rust indicates exactly where to find the problem in the program:

```
$ cargo run
   Compiling branches v0.1.0 (file:///projects/branches)
error[E0308]: `if` and `else` have incompatible types
 --> src/main.rs:4:44
  |
4 |     let number = if condition { 5 } else { "six" };
  |                                 -          ^^^^^ expected integer, found `&str`
  |                                 |
  |                                 expected because of this

error: aborting due to previous error

For more information about this error, try `rustc --explain E0308`.
error: could not compile `branches`

To learn more, run the command again with --verbose.
```

The expression in the `if` block evaluates to an integer,
and the expression in the `else` block evaluates to a string.
This won't work because variables must have a single type.
Rust needs to know at compile time what type the `number` variable is,
definitively, so it can verify at compile time that its type is valid
everywhere we use `number`.
Rust wouldn't be able to do that if the type of `number`
was only determined at runtime;
the comiler would be more complex and would make fewer guarantees
about the code if it had to keep track of multiple hypothetical types for any bariable.

## Repetition with Loops

It's often useful to execute a block of code more than once.
For this task,
Rust provides several _loops_.
A loop runs through the code inside the loop body to the end
and then starts immediately back at the beginning.
To experiment with loop,
let's make a new project called _loops_.

Rust has three kinds of loops: `loop`, `while`, and `for`.
Let's try each one.

### Repeating Code with `loop`

Filename: src/main.rs

```rs
fn main() {
    loop {
        println!("again!");
    }
}
```

When we run this program,
we'll see `again!` printed over and over continuously
until we stop the program manually.
Most terminals support a keyboard shortcut,
ctrl-c, to interrupt a program that is stuck in a continual loop.
Give it a try:

```
$ cargo run
   Compiling loops v0.1.0 (file:///projects/loops)
    Finished dev [unoptimized + debuginfo] target(s) in 0.29s
     Running `target/debug/loops`
again!
again!
again!
again!
^Cagain!
```

The symbol `^C` represents where you pressed ctrl-c.
You may or may not see the word `again!` printed after the `^C`,
depending on where the code was in the loop when it received
the interrupt signal.

Fortunately,
Rust provides another,
more reliable way to break out a loop.
You can place the `break` keyword
within the loop to tell the program when to stop executing the loop.
Recall that we did this in the guessing game in the
"Guitting After a Correct Guess"
section of Chapter 2 to exit the program when the user won the game by guessing the correct number.

### Returning Values from Loops

One of the uses of a `loop` is to retry an operation
you know might fail,
such as checking whether a thread has completed its job.
However, you might need to pass the result of that operation to the
rest of your code.
To do this, you can add the value you want returned after the `break` expression
you use to stop the loop;
that value will be returned out of the loop so you can use it,
as shown here:

```rs
fn main() {
    let mut counter = 0;

    let result = loop {
        counter += 1;

        if counter == 10 {
            break counter * 2;
        }
    };

    println!("The result is {}", result);
}
```

Before the loop,
we declare a variable named `counter` and initialize it to `0`.
Then we declare a variable named `result` to hold the value returned from the loop.
On every iteration of the loop,
we add `1` to the `counter` variable,
and then check whether the counter is equal to `10`.
When it is, we use the `break` keyword
with the value `counter * 2`.
After the loop,
we use a semicolon to end the statement
that assigns the value to `result`.
Finally, we print the value in `result`,
which in this case is 20.

## Conditional Loops with `while`
