# What Is Ownership?

Rust's central feature is _ownership_.
Alothough the feature is straightforward to explain,
it has deep implications for the rest of the language.

All programs have to manage the way they use a computer's memory while running.
Some languages have garbage collection that cnostantly looks for no longer used memory as the program runs;
in other languages, the programmer must explicitly allocate and free the memory.
Rust uses a thrid approach:
memory is managed though a system of ownership with a set of rules that the compiler checks at compile time.
None of the onwership features slow down your programs while it's running.

Because ownership is a new concept for many programmers.
it does take some time to get used to.
The good news is that the more expreienced you become with Rust and the rules of the ownership system,
the more you'll be able to naturally develop code that is safe and efficient.
Keep at it!

When you understand ownership,
you'll have a solid foundation for understanding the features
that make Rust unique.
In this chapter,
you'll learn ownership by working thorough some examples
that focus on a very common data structure: strings.

---

### The Stack and the Heap

In many programming languages,
you don't have to think about the stack and the heap very often.
But in a systems programming language like Rust, whether a value is on the stack or the heap has more of an effect on how the language
behaves and why you have to make certain decisions.
Parts of ownership will be described in relation to the stack and the heap
later in this chapter, so here is a brief explanation in preparation.

Both the stack and the heap are parts of memory that are available
to your code to use at runtime,
but they are structured in different ways.
The stack stores values in the order it gets them and removes the values in the opposite order.
This is reffered to as _last inf, first out_.
Think of a stack of plates:
when you add more plates,
you put them on top of the pile,
and when you need a plate,
you take one off the top.
Adding or removing plates from the middle or bottom wouldn't work as well! Adding data is called _pushing onto the stack_, and removing data is called _popping off the stack_.

Add data stored on the stack must have a known, fixed size.
Data with an unknown size at compile time or a size that might change must be stored on the heap instead.
The heap is less organized:
when you put data on the heap,
you request a certain amount of space.
The memory allocator finds an empty spot in the heap that is big enough,
marks it as being in use,
and returns a _pointer_,
which is the address of that location.
This process is called _allocationg on the heap_ and is sometimes abbreviated as just _allocation_.
Pushing values onto the stack is not considered allocating.
Because the pointer is a known, fixed size, you can store the pointer on the stack,
but when you want the actural data, you must follow the pointer.

Think of being seated at a restaurant. When you enter, you state the number of people in your group, and the staff finds an empty table that fits everyone and leads you there.
If someone in your group comes late, they can ask where you've been seated to find you.

Pushing to the stack is faster than allocating on the heap
because the allocator never has to search for a place to store new data;
that location is always at the top of the stack.
Comparatively, allocating space on the heap requires more work,
because the allocator must find a big enough space to hold the data and then
perform bookkeeping to prepare for the next allocation.

Accessing data in the heap is slower thatn accessing data on the stack because you have to follow a pointer to get there.
Contemporary processors are faster if they jump around less in memory.
Continuing the analogy, consider a server at a restaurant taking orders from many tables.
It's most efficient to get all the orders at one table before moving on to the next table.
Taking an order from table A,
then an order from table B,
then one from A again,
and then one from B again
would be a much slower process.
By the same token,
a processor can do its job better if it works on data that's
close to other data (as it is on the stack)
rather than farther away (as it can be on the heap).
Allocating a large amount of space on the heap can also take time.

When your code calls a function,
the values passed into the function
(including, potentially, pointers to data on the heap)
and the function's local variables get pushed onto the stack.
When the function is over,
those values get popped off the stack.

Keeping track of what parts of code are using what data on the heap,
minimizing the amount of duplicate data on the heap,
and cleaning up unused data on the heap so you don't run out of space are
all problems that ownership addresses.
Once you understand ownership, you won't need to think about the stack and the heap very often,
but knowing that managing heap data is why ownership exists can help explain why it works the way it does.

### Ownership Rules

First, let's take a look at the ownership rules.
Keep these rules in mind as we work through the examples than illustrate them:

- Each value in rust has a variable that's called its _owner_.
- There can only be one owner at a tiem.
- When the owner goes out of scope, the value will be dropped.

### Variable Scope

We've walked through an example of a Rust program already in Chapger 2.
Now that we're past basic systax,
we won't include all the `fn main() {` code in examples, so if you're following along,
you'll have to put the following examples inside a `main` function manually.
As a result, our examples will be a bit more concise,
letting us focus on the actual details rather than boilerplate code.

As a first example of ownership, we'll look at the _scope_ of some variables.
A scope is the range within a program for which an items is valid.
Let's sya we have a variable that looks like this:

```rs
let s = "hello";
```

The variable `s` refers to a string literal,
where the value of the strin gis hardcoded into the text of our program.
The variable is valid from the point at which it's declared until the end of the current _scope_.
Listing 4-1 has comments annotating where the variable `s` is valid.

```rs
{                       // s is not valid here, it's not yet declared
    let s = "hello";    // s is valid from this point forward

    // do stuff with s
}                       // this scope is now over, and s is no longer valid
```

Listing 4-1: A variable and the scope in which it is valid

In other words, there are two important points in time here:

    - When `s` comes into scope, it is valid.
    - It remains valid until it goes _out of scope_.

At this point, the relationship between scopes and when variables are valid is similar to that in other programming languages.
Now we'll build on top of this understanding by introrducing the `String` type.

### The `String` Type
