# Enums and Pattern Matching

In this chapter we'll look at enumerations,
also referred to as enums.
Enums allow you to define a type by enumerating its possible variants.
First, we'll define and use an enum to show how an enum can encode meaning along with data.
Next, we'll explore a particularly useful enum,
called `Option`,
which expresses that a value can be either something or nothing.
Then we'll look at how pattern matching in the `match` expression makes it easy to run different code for different values of an enum.
Finally, we'll cover how the `if let` construct is another convenient and concise idiom avaliable to you tu handle enums in your code.

Enums are a feature in many languages,
but their capabilities differ in each language.
Rust's enums are most similar to algebraic data types in functional languages,
such as F#, OCaml, and Haskell.

## Defining an Enum

Let's look at a situation we might want to express in code and see why enums are useful and more appropriate than structs in this case.
Say we need to work with IP addresses.
Currently, two major standards are used for IP addreses:
version four and version six.
These are the only possiblilities for an IP address that our program will come across:
we can _enumerate_ all possible variants,
which is where enumeration gets its name.

Any IP address can be either a version four or a version six address,
but not both at the same time.
That property of IP addresses makes the enum data structure appropriate,
because enum values can only be one of its variants.
Both version four and version six addresses are still funamentally IP addresses,
so they should be treated as the same type when the code is handling situations that apply to any kind of IP address.

We can express this concept in code by defining an `IpAddrKind` enumeration and listing the possiblbe kinds an IP address can be,
`V4` and `V6`.
These are the variants of the enum:

```rs
enum IpAddrKind {
    V4,
    V6
}
```

`IpAddrKind` is now a custom data type that we can use elsewhere in our code.

## Enum Values

We can create instances of each of the two variants of `IpAddrKind` like this:

```rs
    let four = IpAddrKind::V4;
    let six = IpAddrKind::V6;
```

Note that the variants of the enum are namespaced under its identifier,
and we use a double colon to separate the two.
The reason this is useful is that now both values `IpAddrKind::V4` and `IpAddrKind::V6` are of the same type:
`IpAddrKind`.
We can then, for instance, define a function that takes any `IpAddrKind`:

```rs
fn route(ip_kind: IpAddrKind) {}
```

And we can call this function with either variant:

```rs
    route(IpAddrKind::V4);
    route(IpAddrKind::V6);
```

Using enums has even more advantages.
Thinking more about our IP address type,
at the moment we don't have a way to store that actual Ip address _data_;
we only know what _kind_ it is.
Given that you just learned about structs in Chater 5,
you might tackle this problems as shown in Listing 6-1

```rs
    enum IpAddrKind {
        V4,
        V6,
    }

    struct IpAddr {
        kind: IpAddrKind,
        address: String,
    }

    let home = IpAddr {
        kind: IpAddrKind::V4,
        address: String::from("127.0.0.1"),
    };

    let loopback = IpAddr {
        kind: IpAddrKind::V6,
        address: String::from("::1"),
    };
```

Listing 6-1: Storing the data and `IpAddrKind` variant of an IP address using a `struct`

Here, we've defined a struct `IpAddr` that has two fields:
a `kind` field that is of type `IpAddrKind` (the enum we defined previously) and an `address` field of type `String`.
We have two instances of this struct.
The first, `home`, has the value `IpAddrKind::V4` as its `kind` with associated address data of `127.0.0.1`.
the second instance, `loopback`, has the other variant of `IpAddrKind` as its `kind` value, `V6`,
and has address `::1` associated with it.
We've used a struct to bundle the `kind` and `address` values together,
so now the variant is assocated with the value.

We can represent the same concept in a more concise way using just an enum,
rather than an enum inside a struct,
by putting data directly into each enum varinat.
This new definition of the `IpAddr` enum says that both `V4` and `V6` variants will have associated `String` values:

```rs
    enum IpAddr {
        V4(String),
        V6(String),
    }

    let home = IpAddr::V4(String::from("127.0.0.1"));

    let loopback = IpAddr::V6(String::from("::1"));
```

We attach data to each variant of the enum directly, so there is no need for an extra struct.

There's another advantage to using an enum rather than a struct:
each variant can have different types and amounts of assocated data.
version four type IP addresses will always have four numeric components that will have values between 0 and 255.
If we wanted to store `V4` addresses as four `V8` values but still express `V6` addresses as one `String` value,
we wouldn't be able to with a strurct Enums handle this case with ease:

```rs
    enum IpAddr {
        V4(u8, u8, u8, u8),
        V6(String),
    }

    let home = IpAddr::V4(127, 0, 0, 1);

    let loopback = IpAddr::V6(String::from("::1"))
```

We've shown several different ways to define data structures to store version four and version six IP Addresses.
However, as it turns out,
wanting to store IP addresses and encode which kind they are is so common that the standard library has a definition we can use!
Let's look at how the standard library defines `IpAddr`: it has the exact enum and variants that we've defined and used,
but it embeds the address data inside the variants in the form of two different structs,
which are defined differently for each variant:

```rs
struct Ipv4Addr {
    // --snip--
}

struct Ipv6Addr {
    // --snip--
}

enum IpAddr {
    V4(Ipv4Addr)
    V6(Ipv6Addr)
}
```

This code illustrates that you can put any kind of data inside an enum variant:
strings, numeric types, or structs, for example.
You can even include another enum!
Also, standard library types are often not much more complicated
than what you might come up with.

Note that even though the standard library contains a definition for `IpAddr`,
we can still create and use our own definition without conflict because we haven't brought the standard library's definition into our scope.
We'll talk more about brining types into scope in Chapter 7.

Let's look at another example of an enum in Listing 6-2:
this one has wide variety of types embedded in its variants.

```rs
enum Message {
    Quit,
    Move { x: i32, y: i32 },
    Write(String),
    ChangeColor(i32, i32, i32),
}
```

Listing 6-2: A `Message` enum whose variants each store different amounts and types of values

This enum has four variants with different types: - `Quit` has no data associated with it at all. - `Move` includes an anonymous sstruct inside it. - `Write` includes a single `String`. - `ChangeColoe` includes three `i32` values.

Defining an enum with variants such as the ones in Listing 6-2 is similar to defining different kinds of struct definitions,
except the enum doesn't use the `struct` keyword and all the variants are grouped together under the `Message` type.
The following structs could hold the same data that the preceding enum variants hold:

```rs
struct QuitMessage; // unit struct
struct MoveMessage {
    x: i32,
    y: i32
}
struct WriteMessage(String); // tuple struct
struct ChangeColorMessage(i32, i32, i32); // tuple struct
```

But if we used the different structs,
which each have their own type,
we couldn't as easily define a function to take any of these kinds of messages as we could with the `Message` enum defined in Listing 6-2,
which is a single type.

There is one more similarity between enuums and structs:
just as we're able to define
methods on structs using `impl`,
we're also able to define methods on enums.
Here's a method names `call` that we could define
on our `Message` enum:

```rs
impl Message {
    fn call(&self) {
        // method body would be defined here
    }
}

let m = Message::Write(String::from("hello"));
m.call();
```

The body of the method
would use `self` to get
the value that
we called the method on.
In this example,
we've created a variable `m` that has the value
`Message::Write(String::from("hello"))`,
and that is what
`self` will be in the body of the `call` method
when `m.call()` runs.

Let's look at another enum
in the standard library
that is very common
and useful: `Option`.

## The Option Enum and Its Advantages Over Null Values

In the previous section,
we looked at how
the `IpAddr` enum let us
use Rust's type system
to encode more information
than just the data into our program.
This section explores a case study of `Option`,
which is another enum
defined by the standard library.
The `Option` type if used in many places
because it encodes the very common scenario
in which a value could be something
or it could be nothing.
Expressing this concept in terms of the type system
means the compiler
can check
whether you've handled
all the cases
you should be handling;
this functionality can prevent bugs
that are exremely common in other programming languages.

Programming language design is often
thought of in terms of which features you include,
but the features you exclude are important too.
Rust doesn't have the null feature
that many other languages have.
_Null_ is a value that means there is no value there.
In languages with null,
variables can always be in one of two states: null or not-null.

In his 2009 presentation “Null References: The Billion Dollar Mistake,” Tony Hoare, the inventor of null, has this to say:

```
I call it my billion-dollar mistake. At that time, I was designing the first comprehensive type system for references in an object-oriented language. My goal was to ensure that all use of references should be absolutely safe, with checking performed automatically by the compiler. But I couldn’t resist the temptation to put in a null reference, simply because it was so easy to implement. This has led to innumerable errors, vulnerabilities, and system crashes, which have probably caused a billion dollars of pain and damage in the last forty years.
```

The problem with null values is that
if you try to use a null value
as a not-nul value,
you'll get an error of some kind.
Because this null or not-null property is pervasive,
it's extremely easy to make this kind of error.

However, the concept that null is trying to express is still a useful one:
a null is a value that is currently invalid or absent for some reason.

The problem isn't really with the concept
but with the particular implementation.
As such,
Rust does not have nulls,
but it does have an enum that can encode the concept of a value being
present of absent.
This enum is `Option<T>`,
and it is defined by the standard library as follows:

```rs
enum Option<T> {
    Some(T),
    None,
}
```

The `Option<T>` enums is so useful
that it's even included in the prelude;
you don't need to bring it into scope explicitly.
In addition, so are its variants:
yoy can use `Some` and `None` directly
without the `Option::` prefix.
The `Option<T>` enum is still just a regular enum,
and `Some(T)` and `None` are still variants
of type `Option<T>`.

The `<T>`syntax is a feature of Rust
we haven't talked about yet.
It's a generic type parameter,
and we'll cover generics in more detail in Chapter 10.
For now,
all you need to know is that `<T>` means the
`Some` variant of the `Option` enum can hold one piece of data
of any type.
Here are some examples of using `Option` values to hold number types
and string types:

```rs
let some_number = Some(5);
let some_string = Some("a string");

let absent_number: Option<i32> = None;
```

If we use `None` rahter than `Some`,
we need to tell Rust what type of `Option<T>` we have,
because the compiler can't infer the type
that the `Some` variant will hold by looking only at a `None` value.

When we have a `Some` value,
we know that a value is present and the value is held within the `Some`.
When we have a `None` value,
in some sense,
it means the same thing as null:
we don't have a valid value.
So why is having `Option<T>` any better than having null?

In short,
because `Option<T>` and `T` (whrer `T` can be any type)
are different types,
the compiler won't let us use an `Option<T>` value
as if it were definitely a valid value.
For example,
this code won't compile because it's trying to add an
`i8` to an `Option<i8>`:

```rs
let x: i8 = 5;
let y: Option<i8> = Some(5);

let sum = x + y;
```

If we run this code,
we get an error message like this:

```
$ cargo run
   Compiling enums v0.1.0 (file:///projects/enums)
error[E0277]: cannot add `Option<i8>` to `i8`
 --> src/main.rs:5:17
  |
5 |     let sum = x + y;
  |                 ^ no implementation for `i8 + Option<i8>`
  |
  = help: the trait `Add<Option<i8>>` is not implemented for `i8`

error: aborting due to previous error

For more information about this error, try `rustc --explain E0277`.
error: could not compile `enums`

To learn more, run the command again with --verbose.
```

Intense! In effect,
this error message means
that Rust doesn't understand how to add an `i8` and an `Option<i8>`,
because they're different types.
When we have a value
of a type like `i8` in Rust,
the compiler will ensure that
we always have a valid value.
We can proceed confidently
without having to check
for null before using that value.
Only when we have an `Option<T>`
(or whatever type of value we're working with)
do we have to worry about possibly not having a value,
and the compiler will make sure
we handle that case before using the value.

In other words,
you have to convert an `Option<T>`
to a `T` before you can perform `T` operation with it.
Generally, thhis helps catch one of the most common issues
with null:
assuming that something isn't null when it actually is.

Not having to worry about
incorrectly assuming a not-null value
helps you to be more confident
in your code.
In order to have a value
that can possibly be null,
you must explicitly
opt in by making the type of that value
`Option<T>`.
Then, when you use that value,
you are required to explicitly
handle that case when the value is null.
Everywhere that a value has a type
that isn't an `Option<T>`,
you can safely assume that the value isn't null.
This was a deliberate design decision
for rust to limit null's pervasiveness and increase the
safety of Rust code.

So, how do you get the `T` value
out of a `Some` variant
when you have a value of type
`Option<T>`
so you can use that value?
The `Option<T>` enum
has a large number of methods
that are useful
in a variety of situations;
you can check them out in
its documentation.
Becoming familiar with the methods
on `Option<T>`
will be extremely useful
in oyu journey with Rust.

In general,
in order to use an `Option<T>` value,
you want to have code
that will handle each variant.
You want some code
that will run only when
you hvae a `Some(T)` value,
and this code is allowed to use the inner `T`.
You want some other code to run
if you have a `None` value,
and that code
doesn't have a `T` value available.
The `match` expression is a control flow construct
that does just this
when used with enums:
it will run different code
depending on which
variant of the enum it has,
and that code can use
the data inside the matching value.
