# The `match` Control Flow Operator

Rust has an extremely powerful control flow operator called `match`
that allows you
to compare a value against a series of patterns
and then execute code
based on which pattern matches.
Patterns can be made up of literal values,
variable names,
wildcards,
and many other things;
Chapter 18 covers all the different kinds of patterns
and what they do.
The power of `match` comes from the expressiveness
of the patterns and
the fact that the compiler confirms that all possible cases are handled.

Think of a `match` expression as being like a coin-sorting machine:
coins clide down a track
with variously sized holes along it,
and each coin falls through the first hole it
encounters that it fits into.
In the same way,
values go though each pattern in a `match`,
and at the first pattern
the value "fits,"
the value falls into the associated code block
to be used during execution.

Because we just mentioned coins,
let's use them
as an example using `match`!
We can write a function
that can take an unknown United States coin and,
in a similar way
as the counting machine,
determine which coin it is and
return its value in cents,
as shown here in Listing 6-3.

```rs
enum Coin {
    Penny,
    Nickel,
    Dime,
    Quarter,
}

fn value_in_cents(coin: Coin) -> u8 {
    match coin {
        Coin::Penny => 1,
        Coin::Nickel => 5,
        Coin::Dime => 10,
        Coin::Quarter => 25,
    }
}
```

Listing 6-3: An enum and a match expression that has the variants of the enum as its patterns

Let's break down
the `match` in the
`value_in_cents` function.
First,
we list the `match` keyword
followed by an expression,
which in this case is the value `coin`.
This seems very similar
to an expression used with `if`,
but there's a big difference:
with `if`,
the expression needs to return a Boolean value,
but here,
it can be any type.
The type of `coin` in this example
is the `Coin` enum that we defined on line 1.

Nest are the `match` arms.
An arm has two parts:
a pattern and some code.
The first arm here
has a pattern that is the value `Coin::Penny`
and then the `=>` operator that separates
the pattern and the code to run.
The code in this case is just the value `1`.
Each arm is separated from the next with a comma.

When the `match` expression executes,
it compares the resulting value
against the pattern
of each arm,
in order.
If a pattern matches the value,
the code associated with that pattern is executed.
If that pattern doesn't match the value,
execution continues to the next arm,
much as in a coin-sorting machine.
We can have as many arms
as we need;
in Listing 6-3,
our `match` has four arms.

The code
associated with each arm
is an expression,
and the resulting value
of the expression in the matching arm
is the value
that gets returned for the
entire `match` expression.

Curly brackets
typically aren't used if
the match arm code is short,
as it is in Listing 6-3 where
each arm just returns a value.
If you want to run multiple lines
of code in a match arm,
you can use curly brackets,
For example,
the following code
would print
"Lucky penny!" every time
the method was called with
`Coin::Penny` but
would still return that
last value of the block; `1`:

```rs
fn value_in_cents(coin: Coin) -> u8 {
    match coin {
        Coin::Penny => {
            println!("Lucky penny!");
            1
        }
        Coin::Nickel => 5,
        Coin::Dime => 10,
        Coin::Quarter => 25,
    }
}
```

## Patterns that Bind to Values

Another useful feature
of match arms is that they can bind to the values
that match the pattern.
This is how
we can extract values
out of enum variants.

As an example,
let's change one of our enum variants
to hold data inside it.
From 1999 through 2008,
the United States minted quarters
with different design for each of the 50 states
on one side.
No other coins got state design,
so only quarters have this extra value.
We can add this information
to our `enum` by changing the `Quarter` variant to include a `UsState`
value stored inside it,
which we've done here in Listing 6-4.

```rs
#[derive(Debug)] // so we can inspect the state in a minute
enum UsState {
    Alabama,
    Alaska,
    // --snip--
}

enum Coin {
    Penny,
    Nickel,
    Dime,
    Quarter(UsState),
}
```

Listing 6-4: A `Coin` enum in which the `Quarter` variant also holds a `UsState` value

Let's imagine that a friend of ours is trying
to collect all 50 state quaters.
While we sort our loose change by coin type,
we'll also call out the name
of the state associated with each quarter so if it's one our friend doesn't have,
they can add it to their collection.

In the match expression for this code,
we add a variable called `state` to the pattern that
matches values of the variant
`Coin::Quarter`.
When a `Coin::Quarter` matches,
the `state` variable
will bind to the value of that
quarter's state.
Then we can use `state`
in the code for that arm, like so:

```rs
fn valie_in_cents(coin: Coin) -> u8 {
    match coin {
        Coin::Penny => 1,
        Coin::Nickel => 5,
        Coin::Dime => 10,
        Coin::Quarter(state) => {
            println!("State quarter from {:?}!", state);
            25
        }
    }
}
```

If we were to call `value_in_cents(Coin::Quarter(UsState::Alask))`, `coin`
would be `Coin::Quarter(UsState::Alaska)`.
When we compare
that value
with each of the match arms,
none of them match until we reach
`Coin::Quarter(state)`.
At that point,
the binding for `state`
will be the value `UsState::Alaska`.
We can then use that binding in the `println!` expression,
thus getting the inner state value
out of the `Coin` enum variant for `Quarter`.

## Matching with `Option<T>`

In the previous section, we wanted to get the inner `T` value
out of the `Some` case
when using `Option<T>`;
we can also handle
`Option<T>` using `match` as we did
with the `Coin` enum!
Instead of comparing coins,
we'll compare the variants of `Option<T>`,
but the way that the `match` expression works remains the same.

Let's say we want to write a function
that takes an `Option<i32>` and,
if there's a value inside,
adds 1 to that value.
If there isn't a value inside,
the function should return the `None` value
and not attempt to perform any operations.

This function is very easy to write,
thanks to `match`, and will look like Listing 6-5.

```rs
    fn plus_one(x: Option<i32>) -> Option<i32> {
        match x {
            None => None,
            Some(i) => Some(i + 1),
        }
    }

    let five = Some(5);
    let six = plus_one(five);
    let none = plus_one(None);
```

Listing 6-5: A function that uses a `match` expression on an `option<i32>`

Let's examine the first execution of `plus_one` in more detail.
When we call `plus_one(five)`,
the variable `x` in the body of `plus_one`
will have the value `Some(5)`.
We then compare that against each match arm.

```rs
    None => None,
```

The `Some(5)` value
doesn't match the pattern `None`,
so we continue to the next arm.

```rs
    Some(i) => Some(i + 1),
```

Does `Some(5)` match `Some(i)`?
Why yes it does!
We have the same variant.
The `i` binds to the value
contained in `Some`,
so `i` takes the value `5`.
The code in the match arm is then executed,
so we add 1 to the value of `i`
and create a new `Some` value with
our total `6` inside.

Now let's consider the second call
of `plus_one` in Listing 6-5,
where `x` is `None`.
We enter the `match`
and compare to the first arm.

```rs
    None => None,
```

It matches!
There's no value to add to,
so the program stops and returns the `None` value
on the right side of `=>`.
Because the first arm matched,
no other arms are compared.

Combining `match` and enums is useful
in many situations.
You'll see this pattern
a lot in Rust code:
`match` against an enum,
bind a variable to the data inside,
and then execute code based on it.
It's a bit tricky at first,
but once you get used to it,
you'll wish you had it in all languages.
It's consistently a user favorite.
