# Common Collections

Rust's standard library
includes a number of very userful
data structures called _collections_.
Most other data types
represent one specific value,
but collections can contain multiple values.
Unlike the built-in array and tuple types,
the data these collections point
to is stored on the heap,
which means the amount of data does
not need to be known
at compile time
and can grow
or shrink as the program runs.
Each kind of collection has different capabilities
and costs,
and choosing an appropriate one
for your current situtation is a skill
you'll develop over tiem.
In this chapter,
we'll discuss three collections that are
used very often in Rust progarms:

- a _vector_ allows you to store a variable number of value next to each other.
- A _string_ is a collection of characters.
  We've mentioned the `String` type previously,
  but in this chpater we'll talk about it in depth.
- A _hash map_ allows you to associate a value
  with a particular key.
  It's particular implementation of the more general data structure called a _map_.

To learn about the other kinds of collections provided by the standard library,
see the documentation.

We'll discuss how to create and update vectors,
strings, and hash maps, as well as what makes each special.

## Storing Lists of Values with Vectors

The first collection type we'll look at is `Vec<T>`,
also known as a _vector_.
Vectors allow you to store more than one value
in a single data structure
that puts all the values next to each other in memory.
Vectors can only store values of the same type.
They are useful when you have a list of items,
such as the lines of text in a file or the prices of items in a shopping cart.

### creating a New Vector

To create a new, empty vector,
we can call the `Vec::new` function,
as shown in Listing 8-1.

```rs
  let v: Vec<i32> = Vec::new();
```

Listing 8-1: Creating a new, empty vector to hold values of type `i32`

Note that we added a type annotation here.
Because we aren't inserting any values
into this vector,
Rust doesn't know what kind of elements we intend to store.
This is an important point. Vectors are implemented using generics;
we'll cover how to use generics with your own types in Chapter 10.
For now, know that the `Vec<T>` type provided by
the standard library can hold any type,
and when a specific vector holds a specific type,
the type is specified within angle brackets.
In Listing 8-1, we've told Rust that the `Vec<T>` in `v` will hold elements of the `i32` type.

In more realistic code,
Rust can often infer the type of value
you want to store once you insert values,
so you rarely need to do this type annotation.
It's more common to create a `Vec<T>` that has initial values,
and Rust provides the `vec!` macro for convenience.
The macro will create a new vector that
holds the values you give it.
Listing 8-2 creates a new `Vec<i32>` that holds the values
`1`, `2`, and `3`.
The integer type is `i32` because that's the default
integer type,
as we discussed in the "Data Types" section of Chapter 3.

```rs
  let v = vec![1, 2, 3];
```

Listing 8-2: Creating a new vector containing values

Because we've given initial `i32` values,
Rust can infer that the type of `v` is `Vec<i32>`,
and the type annotation isn't nevessary.
Next, we'll look at how to modify a vector.

### Updating a Vector

To create a vector and then add elements to it,
we can use the `push` method,
as shown in Listing 8-3.

```rs
  let mut v = Vec::new();

  v.push(5);
  v.push(6);
  v.push(7);
  v.push(8);
```

Listing 8-3: Using the push method to add values to a vector

As with any variable,
if we want to be able to change its value,
we need to make it mutable using the `mut` keyword,
as discussed in Chapter 3.
The numbers we place inside are all of type `i32`,
and Rust infers this from the data,
so we don't need the `Vec<i32>` annotation.

### Dropping a vector Drops Its Elements

Like any other `struct`,
a vector is freed when it goes out of scope,
as annotated in Listingn 8-4.

```rs
{
  let v = vec![1, 2, 3, 4];

  // do stuff with v
} // <- v goes out of scope and is freed here
```

Listing 8-4: Showing where the vector and its elements are dropped

When the vector gets dropped,
all of its contents are also dropped,
meaning those integers it holds will be cleaned up.
This may seem like a straightforward point but can get a bit more
complicated when you start to introduce references to the elements of the vector.
Let's tackle that next!

### Reading Elements of Vectors

Now that you know how to create, update, and destroy vectors,
knowing how to read their contents is a good next step.
There are two ways to reference a value
stored in a vector.
In the examples,
we've annotated the types of the values
that are returned from these functions for
extra clarity.

Listing 8-5 shows both methods of accessing a value in a vector, either with indexing syntax or the get method.

```rs
  let v = vec![1, 2, 3, 4, 5];

  let third: &i32 = &v[2];
  println!("The third element is {}", third);

  match v.get(2) {
    Some(third) => println!("The third element is {}", third),
    None => println!("There is no third element."),
  }
```

Listing 8-5: Using indexing syntax or the get method to access an item in a vector

Note two details here.
First, we use the index value of `2`
to get the third element:
vectors are indexed by number,
starting at zero.
Second, the two ways to get the third element are
by using `&` and `[]`,
which gives us a reference,
or by using the `get` method with the index
passed as an argument,
which gives us an `Option<&T>`.

Rust has two ways to reference an element so you can
choose how the program behaves when you try to use an index
value that the vector doesn't have an element for.
As an example,
let's see what a program will do
if it has a vector that holds five elemtns
and then tries to access an element at index 100,
as shown in Listing 8-6.

```rs
  let v = vec![1, 2, 3, 4, 5];

  let does_not_exist = &v[100];
  let does_not_exist = v.get(100);
```

Listing 8-6: Attempting to access the element at index 100 in a vector containing five elements

When we run this code,
the first `[]` method will cause the program to panic
because it reference a nonexistent element.
This method is best used
when your program to crash if there's an attempt to access an element
past the end of the vector.

When the `get` method is passed an index
that is outside the vector,
it returns `None` without panicking.
You would use this method if accessing an element beyond the range
of the vector happens occasionally under normal circumstances.
Your code will then have logic to handle having
either `Some(&element)` or `None`,
as discussed in Chapter 6.
For example,
the index could be coming from a person
entering a number.
if they accidentally enter a number
that's too large and the program gets `None` value,
you could tell the user
how many items
are in the current vector
and give them another chance
to enter a valid value.
That would be more user-friendly than crashing the program due to a typo!

When the program has a valid reference,
the borrow checker enforces the ownership
and borrowing rules (cover in Chapter 4)
to ensure this reference
and any other references
to the contents of the vector
remain valid.
Recall the rule
that states you can't have
mutable and immutable references in the same scope.
That rule applies in Listing 8-7,
where we hold an immutable reference
to the first element in a vector
and try to add an element to the end,
which won't work if we also try to refer to that
element later in the function:

```rs
let mut v = vec![1, 2, 3, 4, 5];

let first = &v[0];

v.push(9);

println!("The first element is: {}", first);
```

Listing 8-7: Attempting to add an element to a vector while holding a reference to an item

Compiling this code will result in this error:

```
$ cargo run
   Compiling collections v0.1.0 (file:///projects/collections)
error[E0502]: cannot borrow `v` as mutable because it is also borrowed as immutable
 --> src/main.rs:6:5
  |
4 |     let first = &v[0];
  |                  - immutable borrow occurs here
5 |
6 |     v.push(6);
  |     ^^^^^^^^^ mutable borrow occurs here
7 |
8 |     println!("The first element is: {}", first);
  |                                          ----- immutable borrow later used here

error: aborting due to previous error

For more information about this error, try `rustc --explain E0502`.
error: could not compile `collections`

To learn more, run the command again with --verbose.

```

The code in Listing 8-7 might look like it
should work:
why should a reference to the first element
care about what changes at the end of the vector?
This error is due to the way vectors work:
adding a new element
onto the end of the vector
might require allocating new memory and copying
the old elements to the new space,
if there isn't enough room
to put all the elements
next to each other
where the vector currently is.
In that case,
the reference to the first element
would be pointing to deallocated memory.
The borrowing rules prevent
programs from ending up in that situation.

```
Note: For more on the implementation details of the Vec<T> type, see “The Rustonomicon”.
```

### Iterating over the Values in a Vector

If we want to access each element
in a vector in turn,
we can iterate through all of the elements rather than
use indices to access one at a tiem.
Listing 8-8 shows how to use a `for` loop
to get immutable references to each element in a vector
of `i32` valeus and print them.

```rs
let v = vec![100, 32, 57];
for i in &v {
  println!("{}", i);
}
```

Listing 8-8: Printing each element in a vector by iterating
over the elements using `for` loop

We can also iterate over mutable references
to each element in a mutable vector in order to make change
to all the elements.
The `for` loop in Listing 8-9 will add `50` to each element.

```rs
let mut v = vec![100, 32, 57];
for i in &mut v {
  *i += 50;
}
```

Listing 8-9: Iterating over mutable references to elements in a vector

To change the value that the mutable reference refers to,
we have to use
the dereference
operator(\*) to get to the value in `i`
before we can use the `+=` operator.
We'll talk more about the dereference operator
in the "Following the Pointer to the Value with the Dereference Operator" section of Chapter 15.

### Using an Enum to Store Multiple Types

At the beginning of this chapter,
we said that vectors can only store values
that are the same type.
This can be inconvenient;
there are definitely use cases
for needing to store a list of items of
different types.
Fortunately,
the variants of an enum
are defined under the same enum type,
so when we need to store elements of a different type in a vector,
we can defined and use an enum!

For example,
say we want to get values
from a row in a spreadsheet
in which some of the columns
in the row contain integers,
some floating numbers, and
some strings.
We can define an enum whose variants will hold the different
value types,
and then all the enum variants
will be considered
the same type:
that of the enum.
Then we can create a vector
that holds that enum and so,
ultimately,
holds different types.
We've demonstrated this in Listing 8-10.

```rs
  enum SpreadsheetCell() {
    Int(i32),
    Float(f64),
    Text(String),
  }

  let row = vec![
    SpreadsheetCell::Int(3),
    SpreadsheetCell::Text(String::from("blue")),
    SpreadsheetCell::Float(10.12),
  ];
```

Listing 8-10: Defining an enum to store values of different types in one vector

Rust needs to know what types will be in the vector at compile time so it knows exactly how much memory on the heap will be needed to store each element. A secondary advantage is that we can be explicit about what types are allowed in this vector. If Rust allowed a vector to hold any type, there would be a chance that one or more of the types would cause errors with the operations performed on the elements of the vector. Using an enum plus a match expression means that Rust will ensure at compile time that every possible case is handled, as discussed in Chapter 6.

When you’re writing a program, if you don’t know the exhaustive set of types the program will get at runtime to store in a vector, the enum technique won’t work. Instead, you can use a trait object, which we’ll cover in Chapter 17.

Now that we’ve discussed some of the most common ways to use vectors, be sure to review the API documentation for all the many useful methods defined on Vec<T> by the standard library. For example, in addition to push, a pop method removes and returns the last element. Let’s move on to the next collection type: String!

## Storing UTF-8 Encoded Text with Strings

We talked about strings in Chapter 4,
but we'll look at them more depth now.
New Rustaceans commonly get stuck on strings
for a combination of three reasons:
Rust's propensity for exposing possible errors,
strings being a more complicated data structure
than many programmers give them credit for,
and UTF-8.
These factors combine in a way
that can seem difficult when you're coming from other
programming languages.

It's useful to discuss strings in the context
of collections
because strings are implemented as a collection of bytes,
plus some methods to provide
useful functionality when those bytes are interpreted as text.
In this sections,
we'll talk about the operations on `String`
that every collection type has,
such as creating,
updating,
and reading.
We'll also discuss the ways in which `String` is different
from the other collections,
namely how indexing into a `String` is complicated
by the differences between how people and computers interpret `String` data.

### What Is a String?

We'll first define what we mean by the term _string_.
Rust ahs only one string type
in the core language,
which is string slice `str`
that is usually seen in its borrowed from `&str`.
In Chapter 4,
we talked about _string slices_,
which are references to some UTF-8 encoded string data
stored elsewhere.
String literals, for example,
are stored in the program's binary and are therefore string slices.

The `String` type,
which is provided by Rust's standard library
rather than coded into the core language, is a growable, mutable, owned, UTF-8 encoded string type.
When Rustaceans refer to "string" in Rust,
they usually mean the `String` and the string slice `&str` types,
not just one of those types.
Although this section is largely about `String`,
both types are used heavily in Rust's standard library,
and both `String` and string slices are UTF-8 encoded.

Rust's standard library
also includes a number of other string types,
such as `OsString`, `OsStr`, `CString`, and `CStr`.
Library crates can provide even more options for storing string data.
See how those names all end in `String` or `Str`?
They refer to owned and borrowed variants,
just like the `String` and `str` types you've seen previously.
These string types can store text in different encodings or
be represented in memory in a different way,
for example.
We won't discuss these other string types in this chapter;
see their API documentation for more about how to use them and when each is appropriate.

### Creating a New String

Many of the same operations available with `Vec<T>`
are available with `String` as well,
starting with the `new` function to create a string,
shown in Listing 8-11.

```rs
  let mut s = String::new();
```

Listing 8-11: Creating a new, empty String

This line creates a new empty string called `s`,
which we can then load data into.
Often, we'll have some initial data
that we want to start the string with.
For that, we use the `to_string` method,
which is available on any type that implements the `Display` trait,
as string literals do.
Listing 8-12 shows two examples.

```rs
  let data = "initial contents";

  let s = data.to_string();

  // the method also works on a literal directrly:
  let s = "initial contents".to_string();
```

Listing 8-12: Using the to_string method to create a String from a string literal

This code creates a string containing `initial contents".

We can use the function `String::from` to create a `String` from a string literal,
The code in Listing 8-13 is equivalent to the code from Listing 8-12 that uses `to_string`.

```rs
  let s = String::from("innitial contents");
```

Listing 8-13: Using the String::from function to create a String from a string literal

Because strings are used for so many things,
we can use many different generic APIs for strings,
providing us with a lot of options.
Some of them can seem redundant,
but they all have their place!
In this case,
`String::from` and `to_string` do the same thing.
so which you choose is a matter of style.

Rememeber that strings are UTF-8 encoded,
so we can include any properly encoded data in them,
as shown in Listing 8-14.

```rs
fn main() {
    let hello = String::from("السلام عليكم");
    let hello = String::from("Dobrý den");
    let hello = String::from("Hello");
    let hello = String::from("שָׁלוֹם");
    let hello = String::from("नमस्ते");
    let hello = String::from("こんにちは");
    let hello = String::from("안녕하세요");
    let hello = String::from("你好");
    let hello = String::from("Olá");
    let hello = String::from("Здравствуйте");
    let hello = String::from("Hola");
}
```

Listing 8-14: Storing greetings in different languages in strings

All of these are valid `String` values.

### Updating a String

A `String` can grow in size and its contents can change,
just like the contents of a `Vec<T>`,
if you push more data into it.
In addition, you can conveniently use the `+` operator
or the `format!` macro to concatenate `String` values.

#### Appending to a `String` with `push_str` and `push`

We can grow a `String` by using the `push_str` method
to append a string slice,
as shown in Listing 8-15.

```rs
  let mut s = String::from("foo");
  s.push_str("bar");
```

Listing 8-15: Appending a string slice to a `String` using the `push_str` method

After these two lines,
`s` will contain `foobar`.
The `push_str` method takes a string slice
because we don't necessarily want to take ownership
of the parameter.
For example, the code in Listing 8-16 shows that it would be unfortunate if we weren't able to use `s2` after appending its contents to `s1`.

```rs
  let mut s1 = String::from("foo");
  let s2 = "bar";
  s1.push_str(s2);
  println!("s2 is {}", s2);
```

Listing 8-16: Using a string slice after appending its contents to a `String`

If the `push_str` method took ownership of `s2`,
we wouldn't be able to print its value on the last line.
However, this code works as we'd expect!

The `push` method takes a single character as a parameter and adds
it to the `String`.
Listing 8-17 shows code that adds the letter
"I" to a `String` using the `push` method.

```rs
  let mut s = String::from("lo");
  s.push('l');
```

Listing 8-17: Adding one character to a `String` value using `push`

As a result of this code, `s` will contain `lol`.

#### Concatenation with the `+` Operator or the `format!` Macro
