# 1.4 Data types

### Booleans

- Booleans are called "bool" in Rust.
- can be either `true` or `false`

### Integers

- Numbers without decimal points are called integers in Rust.
- two types of integers - signed and unsigned
- Additionally, you have to decide how much space your integers will use, which affects the values that the integer can hold.
  - This allows your program to use only the amount of memory it needs and no more.
  - The number in each type indicates how many bits it takes to store a value of that type expressed in binary.
    - signed
      - For example, an `i8` takes up 8 bits. Because _i_ means signed, one of those bits is used to store whether the number is positive or negative. The rest of the bits store the value of number. This means that an `i8` can store the values between -128 and 127, inclusive.
    - unsigned
      - If the number you want to store can only be 0 or positive, you can use an unsigned type instead. An unsigned type uses the letter _u_ instead of _i_.
        Because the unsigned types don't use a bit to store the sign, the range of values they can store is different.
        A `u8` can store the values between 0 and 255, inclusive.
    - isize, usize
      - The `isize` and `usize` integer types are architecture dependent.
        If you're on a 32-bit machine, they will take up 32 bits of space.
        But if you're on a 64-bit machine, thye will take up 64-bits.
        This is the size of a pointer on each of these architectures.
        You use `isize` and `usize` for indexing into collections or counting items.
    - Without any other information, if you write a number without a decimal point in Rust, its type will be `i32`.
      This is a decent default if you're not sure which integer type to use.

### Floating point numbers

- Numbers with a decimal point are called floating-point numbers.
- Like integers, they come in different sizes: `f32` and `f64` using 32 and 64 bits, respectively.
- The default type of a floating-point number is `f64`, which offers more precision than an `f32`.
  Operating on floating-point numbers in computers can be complicated.
  If you've never had to deal with them before, pleas see The Floating-Point Guide.

### Characters

- Characters are our last simple data type.
- Rust can store single cahracters as the `char` data type.
- `char` is a Unicode scalar value, so it can hold more than just ASCII values.
- Because languages are complicated, a `char` might not correspond to what we humans expect a character to be.
- Characters are written with single quotes. Don't confuse them with strings, which use double quotes.

##### Boeleans, integers, floating-point numbers, and characters are the simple built-in types we're goint to talk about. Next come the compound built-in types, starting with tuples.

### Tuples

    - Tuples let you group multiple values together within parentheses.
    These multiple values don't have to be the same type.
    - Tuple indexing uses a dot followed by the index of the item you want, starting from 0.
    - To break the entire tuple into separate pieces, you can use destructuring. To do so, match the structure of your tuple on the left-hand side of a `let` statement before the equals sign.

### Arrays

    - Arrays in Rust are collections where all of the elements have the same type.
    - You can access each element of an array by using square brackets and the index of the element you want, starting from 0.
    - You can also modify an element of an array using square brackets.
    - Arrays have a fixed length set when you initialize them. They can't get bigger or smaller. Even though the array `b` is mutable, we can't add another element to it to make it four elements long instead of three. If we try to add another element to the array, the compiler says we're not allowed.

### Vec

    - If you need a sequence of values that can change is size, you can use a Vec - a type provided by the standard library.

### Slice

    - One primitive type you will see a lot is called a _slice_.
    - Slices let us reference a contiguous subset of data in another data structure.
    - A specific kind of slice is the string slice written as `& str`.String literals are a common way to create string slices.
