# 1.5 Functions

Like functions in other languages, functions in Rust are used to group code so that it can be called multiple times with potentially different values.

- defined a fucntion
  Here's what function definitions look like in general: they start with the `fn` keyword, followed by whatever name you want to give your function.

```rs
fn name(param1: type1, ...) -> return_type {
    // ...body...
}
```

Whithin parentheses, list each parameter the function takes by giving the parameter name, then a colon, then specifying the type of that parameter.
Separate each name/type pair with a comma.
Your function can take as many parameters as you want.

If the function returns a value, put a hyphen, then a greater sign to make an arrow, and then specify the type of the return value. If the function doesn't return a value, leave off arrow and the return type.

Then, open a set of curly brackets, put the code you want to be the body of the function, and close the curly brackets.
There are more complicated function signatures possible.

Here's a concrete example. This function, named `next_birthday`, has two parameters: `name`, which is a string clice, and `current_age`, which is a u8. This function doesn't return a value.

```rs
fn next_birthday(name: &str, current_age: u8) {
    let next_age = current_age + 1;
    println!("Hi {}, on your next birthday, you'll be {}", name, next_age);
}
```

The function body figures out how old the person will be on their next birthday and prints a sentence using the person's name and their next age.

Now, let's see what _calling_ a function looks like.
Once we have a function defined, we can call a function by using its name followed by parentheses with the values for the parameters, called the arguments to this function call.

Here's what calling the `next_birthday` function looks line - first, with the values `Jake` and `33`, and next with the values `Vivian` and `0`.
Running this prints out `Hi Jake, on your next birthday, you'll be 34!`,
and `Hi, Vivian, on your next birthday you'll be 1!`

```rs
fn next_birthday(name: &str, current_age: u8) {
    let next_age = current_age + 1;
    println!("Hi {}, on your next birthday, you'll be {}!", name, next_age);
}

fn main() {
    next_birthday("Jake", 33);
    next_birthday("Vivian", 0);
}
```

Finally, let's look at a function that returns a value.
We'll write a function that takes the number and returns the square of that number.
Note that the last line in the body doesn't have a semicolon at the end.
This tells Rust we want the resulting value of that expression returned out of the function body.

```rs
fn square(num: i32) -> i32 {
    num * num
}

fn main() {
    println!("The answer if {}", square(3));
}
```

This main function will print `The answer is 9`. If we've defined the function signature such that it returns the value, but we accidentally put a semicolon after the last expression, we'll get an error.
Rust gives us a helpful hint that we probably meant to not put that semicolon there.

```rs
fn square(num: i32) -> i32 {
    num * num; // error!
}

fn main() {
    println!("The answer if {}", square(3));
}
```

There is a `return` keyword that you can use to return from a function early,
and you can use it at the end of a function if you wnat.
However, idimatic style is to implicitly return the last expression.

Now you know how to define and call functions that have parameters and return values in Rust.
Next, let's look at control flow features available in Rust.

```rs
fn square(num: i32) -> i32 {
    return num * num;
}

fn main() {
    println!("The answer if {}", square(3));
}
```
