# 1.6 Control flow

Control flow features let you write code that takes one action in some situations and another action in different situations.
They're how you express decisions in your code.

In this modeul,
we're going to cover `if`, `else if`, and `else`;
three different kinds of loops - `loop`, `while`, and `for`;
and the `match` expression.
We'll be defining and calling functions in this module,
so check out the previous module on functions if you need to review.

let's start with `if`, `else if`, and `else`.
We can write code that only uses `if` by starting with the `if` keyword,
than an expression that evaluates to a Boolean,
then curly brackets containing the code that should run if the condition evaluates to `true`.

If the condition evaluates to `false`, the code in the brackets won't get run.
Optionally, you can have an `else` block that goes with an `if` block that contains code to run if the condition evaluates to `false`.

You can also have multiple conditions by having an `if` block,
then an `else if` block with another condition,
as many `else if` blocks as you want,
and then an optional `else` block that is run if all of the conditions evaluate to `false`.

```rs
fn main() {
    discount(10);
}

fn discount(day_of_month: u8) {
    let amount = if day_of_month % 2 == 0 {
        50
    } else {
        10
    };

    println!("Your discunt is  {}", amount);
}
```

Like with functions,
we can get a value from an `if` or `else` block by leaving the semicolon off of the last expression in the block.
We can then put that value in a variable.
Note, we _do_ need a semicolon to end the variable assignment statement.
This code prints `Your discount is 50!`.

Note that wen we return a vaue from an `if else` expression for a variable, there must be an `else` clause so that the variable always gets a value. And the types of the values must all be the same - in this case, `i32`.

```rs
fn main() {
    loop {
        println!("hello, world!");
    }
}
```

Next, let's talk about loop.
Loops let you run the same code repeatedly.
The `loop` keyword lets you specify a block of code that sould be run forever.
This loop prints `hello, world!` over and over again.
This program will run until the end of time.
we've stopped it using _Ctrl + C_.

```rs
use std::io;

fn main() {
    loop {
        println!("What's the secret word?");
        let mut word = String::new();
        io::stdin().read_line(&mut word).expect("Failed to read line");

        if word.trim() == "rust" {
            break;
        }

        println!("You know the secret word! Please proceed!");
    }
}
```

When we run this program and type `java`,
the loop asks us again,
and if we type `rust`,
the code breaks out of the loop and the program ends.
The code we've written here,
using `loop`, `if`, and `break`, could also be written using a `while` loop.

```
while expression {
    ...code...
}
```

A `while` loop is written with the `while` keyword,
then an expression that evaluates to `true` or `false`,
then curly brackets and a block of code.
The code in the block runs over and over,
while the expression specified is `true`.

```rs
use std::io;

// my expect
fn main() {
    let isKnowTheSecretWord = false;
    while isKnowTheSecretWrod {
        let mut word = String::new();
        io::stdin().read_line(&mut word).expect("Failed to read line");

        if word.trim() == rust {
            isKnowTheSecretWord = true
        }
    }
    println!("You know the secret word! Please proceed!");
}

// the lecture
fn main() {
    let mut word = String::new();
    while word.trim() != "rust" {
        pritnln!("What's the secret word?");
        word = String::new();
        io::stdin().read_line(&mut word).expect("Failed to read line");
    }

    println!("You know the secret word! Please proceed!");
}
```

Here's the secret word example rewritten using a `while` loop.
It works exactly the same,
but is a _little_ bit more concise.
The condition for when the loop should exit is now part of the start of the loop,
rather than the loop somewhere.

```
for orange in bowl {
    cut_in_half(orange);
}
```

The `for` loop is probabley the most common loop in Rust code.
It lets you run some code for each item in a collection.
Unlike `for` loops in some other languages, like C, you don't need to manage an index into the collection and worry about off-by-one errors.

```
for item in collection {
    ...code...
}
```

To wrhite a `for` loop,
use the `for` keyword,
then pick a variable name to use inside the loop body to refer to each individual item.
Then, put the keyword `in`, and specify the collection you wnat to use.
Then, put curly brackets and the code that should be run for each item.
Here, for the collection, we're using the range syntax - two tods - to create a range of integers,
starting from `1` inclusive and ending before `11`.

```rs
fn main() {
    for i in 1..11 {
        println!("Now serving number {}", i);
    }
}
```

For each number in the range,
the `for` loop will print `Now serving number` with the number of the current iteration through the loop.
We can see that this code starts by printing `Now serving number 1`,
and ends with printing `Now serving number 10`.

Finally, let's talk about match expressions.
`match` isn't something very many programming languages have.
It's sort of like bunch of `if`/`else ifs` and sort of
like a `switch` or `case` statement,
but better for two reasons:
pattern matching and exhaustiveness checking.
First, let's talk about pattern matching.

Pattern matching is a feature available in Rust in multiple places.
We actually used pattern matching when we destructured a tuple into parts in the _Data types_ module.
Surprise!

```rs
let tup = (1, 'c', true);
let (x, y, z) = tup;
```

Pattern matching is especially useful in `match` expressions.
We specify a list of patterns to test a value against,
and the `match` expression tests the value against each pattern and stops if it finds a matching one.

Then, it runs the code that goes with that pattern.
Here's an example of a `match` expression.
We have an integer stored in the variable `x`, and we want to `match x` against some patterns.

```rs
let x = 3;
match x {
    1 => println!("One is the loneliest number."),
    2 => println!("Two's company"),
    3 => println!("Three's a crowd"),
    _ => println!("Some other number"),
}
```

In this case,
the patterns are literal numbers.
What Rust does is it takes `x`,
which in this case is `3`,
and compares it to `1`,
which doesn't match.
So, it moves on to the next pattern,
`2`, which also doesn't match,
onto the next pattern,
`3`, which does match.
So Rust will print,
`Three's a crowd`,
and be done with this `match` expression.
The underscore in the last pattern is a catch-all that will match any value.
So the last arm functions like an `else` in a set of `if`/`else if`/`else` block.

There are lots of different ideas you can express with pattern matching.
This example shows some logic that might be uesd in a board game where you roll two dice.
We've hardcoded the values of the dice roll to simplify this example.

```rs
fn main() {

    let dice1 = 1;
    let dice2 = 5;

    match (dice1, dice2) {
        (1, 1) => println!("Snake eyes! Go back to the beginning."),
        (5, _) | (_, 5) => {
            println("You rolled at least one 5!");
            println("Move and then roll again!");
        },
        _ => println!("Move your piece!"),
    }
}
```

The first arm matches a roll where both dice have the value `1`.
The second arm matches any roll where one of the two dice is `5`,
but it doesn't matter which one,
and we use underscores in the tuple pattern to ignore any other value.

The vertical bar between the two patterns means _or_.
Also note that we can have multiple lines of code paired with the pattern by putting curly brackets around them.

Again, the last pattern is an underscore that will match any value for the whole tuple that hasn't already been matched.
This code prints, `You rolled at least one 5!` `Move and then roll again!`.

The other reason `match` expressions are awesome is that they must be exhaustive and cover every case.
This prevents bugs that can be caused by forgetting to handle a situation.

for example, here's a `match` statement where we're checking two Booleans:
`is_confirmed` and `is_active`.
We've forgotten the case where `is_confirmed` is `true` and `is_active` is `false`.

```rs
main() {
    let is_conrimed = true;
    let is_active = false;

    match (is_confirmed, is_active) {
        (true, true) => println!("This account is in good standing."),
        (false, true) => println!("You need to confirm your account!"),
        (false, false) => println!("This account will be deactivated."),
    }
}
```

If we try to compile this,
Rust can see that we haven't covered every possibility.
In this case,
In this case,
it's even ablue to tell us which case we missed - thanks, Rust!

We would fix this either by adding the explicit case we missed or by using an underscore to explicitly ackonwledge that we want to ignore all other cases.

In this module,
we've covered the `if`/`else if`/`else` construct that conditionally runs blocks of code;
the `loop` keyword that runs a block repreatedly forever;
the `while` loop that runs code while a condition is `true`;
the `for` loop that iterates over each element in a collection;
and the `match` expression that uses pattern matching and has exhaustiveness checking to handle all possiblities a value might be.

These are the building blocks of complecx logic.
Next module, let's explore enums

- a way to define a custom type that works nicely with match expressions.
