# Enums

_Enums_, or _enumerations_, are a way to express that a value can be one out of a finite set of possible values,
such as one of the suits in a deck of playing cards.
Enums are one of the ways of defining custom types in Rust.
Structs are the other,
and we'll be covering structs in the next module.

We're going to be using some of the primitive data types we covered in module 4, and we'll show how enums work expecially well
with the `match` expression that we covered in module 6 about control flow.

<!-- Enums 가 `match` 랑 잘 맞는구나. -->

In this module, first, we'll talk a bit more about when enums are useful.
Then, we'll look at the syntax for defining and using enums in Rust.
We'll see how we cna define enums variants that holds data, and we'll wrap up the module by looking at some expamples of enums used with `match` expressions.

Let's start with an example of when enums are useful.
Let's say we're writing a program having to do with ice hockye.
In hockey, there are different positions a player can play:
center, wing, defense, or goalie.
There are two aspects of this property of a player
that make this a good case to model with an enum.

<!-- two aspects of a good case to model with an enum. -->

First, a player can only be in one of these positions at a time.
While players may change positions,
they're not going to be in the goal and playing center at the same moment.

Second, we can list all the possibilities for the values of a position in ice hockey.
There's a finite number of possible values,
and they don't change.
Our hockey program won't need to allow users to define new hockey positions.

Now that we've got a use case for an enum,
let's see how to define it in Rust code.
We start with the `enum` keyword and then choose a name for the whole set.
In this case, we're going to choose `HockeyPosition`.

```rs
enum HockeyPosition {
    Center,
    Wing,
    Defense,
    Goalie,
}
```

Then, we put curly brackets and a comma-separated list
of the possible values the enum can have.
There are called the enums's _variants_.
In this case,
we have variants for `Center`, `Wing`, `Defense`, and `Goalie`.
Buth enum names and enum variant names are in camel case in idiomatic Rust.

```rs
enum HockeyPosition {
    Center,
    Wing,
    Defense,
    Goalie,
}

fn next_player(position: HockeyPosition) {
    // code that woud do something like look up
    // another player at the position speicified
}

fn main() {
    let position = HockeyPosition::Defense;
    next_player(position);
}
```

We've got a `HockeyPosition` type defined;
let's look at how to use it!
We can set a variable to have the value of one of the enum's variants by specifying the name of the enum,
then two colons,
then the variant.
The enum variants are namespaced beneath the overall enum type.

We can also define a function to take a `HockeyPosition` as a parameter,
and we can call that function and pass it a value of any of the enum's variants.
This function doesn't do anything

- we're just showing how the signature is written.

Each enum variant can also be defined to hold additional data.
This is different for enums in language like Java and C,
which can't hold additional data.

```rs
enum Clock {
    Sundial(u8),
    Digital(u8, u8),
    Analog(u8, u8, u8),
}
```

Here's an enum that represents different kinds of clocks our program supports.
Sundials only really have an hour value.
The digital clocks we support only have hours and minutes.
The analog clocks we support have an hour hand,
a minute hand,
and a second hand.

Variants can hold multiple pieces of data.
The parentheses are like a tuple.
Enum variants can also have name fields and look like a struct

- we'll be covering struct in the next module.

Finally, let's see how enums and `match` expressions work well together.
Taking our clock example,
let's write a function to print out the time in words,
no matter what kind of clock we have.
This function has a parameter of a `clock` value.

```rs
enum Clock {
   Sundial(u8),
   Digital(u8, u8),
   Analog(u8, u8, u8),
}

fn tell_time(clock: Clock) {
    match clock {
        Clock::Sundial(hours) =>
            println!("It is about {} o'clock", hours)
        Clock::Analog(hours, minutes, seconds) => {
            println!(
                "It is {} minutes and {} seconds post {} o'clock",
                minutes, seconds, hours,
            )
        },
        Clock::Digital(hours, minutes) =>
            println!("It is {} minutes past {}", minutes, hours),
    }
}

fn main() {
    tell_time(Clock::Analog(9, 25, 45));
}
```

In the function,
we'll `match` on that `clock` value and do something different based on which variant we have.
Within each pattern of the `match` expression,
we can destructure the values each variant holds.

For example, in the `Analog` pattern,
we're creating the new variables

- `hours`, `minutes`, and `seconds`
- that matched the three `u8` values held in that variant.
  In the code that goes with that pattern,
  we can use those variables.
  This code prints `It is 25 minutes and 45 seconds past 9 o'clock`.

Enums are great for defining types
that can be one of a possible set of values.
They can optionally hold extra data,
and we can use `match` expressions to make decisions based on which variant we have,
and use the patterns to destructure the values in the variants.

Next, we'll talk about another way to define custom data types - structs.
